Hey, Stan.
Hello.
Hello, hello. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
I'm glad to be here. Glad to talk performance.
I know. I'm excited to talk performance.
It's one of those things I just never get tired of thinking about and focusing on.
It's just so multifaceted.
And as we will see, even for a language like Python that is not primarily performance focused,
there's a lot to talk about.
Yeah, there's an endless bag of tricks.
Yeah.
And I would say, you know, to sort of undercut my own comment there,
Python is increasingly focusing on performance since like 3.10 or so, right?
Mm-hmm.
And the secret is that it's because Python integrates so well with other languages,
it sort of always cared about performance in some way.
It's just sometimes you had to leave Python to do it.
But you guys still got to keep the Python interface.
There's been such an easy high-performance escape hatch.
that making Python itself faster is obviously not unimportant,
but maybe not the primary focus, right?
Like usability, standard library, et cetera, et cetera.
All right.
For people who have not heard your previous episode,
let's maybe just do a quick introduction.
Who's Stan?
Yeah.
So I am Stan Siebert.
I am a manager at Anaconda,
well-known purveyor of Python packages and such.
so my job my day-to-day job is actually managing most of our open source developers
at Anaconda so that includes the Numba team and so we'll be talking about Numba today but other
things like we have people working on Jupyter and Beware for Mobile Python and other projects like
that and so that's what I do mostly is focus on how do we have an impact on the open
source community and what does Python need to sort of stay relevant and keep evolving.
I love it what a cool job as well. Yeah I'm really grateful it's it's a it's a very
position. So I'm really glad I've been able to do it for so long. Yeah. And I would also throw out
in the list of things that you've given a shout out to, I would point out PyScript as well.
Oh, yes. Of course. Yeah. I just started managing the PyScript team again, actually. And so
I forgot about that one too. Yes. PyScript. So Python in your web browser, Python everywhere,
on your phone, in your browser, all the places. Yeah. I mean, it's a little bit out of left field
compared to the other things that you all are working on.
But it's also a super important piece, I think.
So yeah, really cool, really cool there.
So I think we set the stage a bit,
but maybe let's start with Numba.
That one's been around for a while.
Some people know about it.
Others don't.
What is Numba and how do we make Python code faster with Numba?
Yeah, so there have been a lot of Python compilation projects over the years.
Again, Numbus is very fortunate that it's now 12 years old.
So we've been doing it a long time.
And I've been involved with it probably almost 10 of those years now.
And Python, I think one of Numbus' success points is trying to stay focused on an area where we can have a big impact.
And that is trying to speed up numerical code.
So there's a lot of, again, in data science and other sciences,
there's a lot of need to write custom algorithms that do math.
And Numba's sweet spot is really helping you to speed those up.
So we see Numba used in a lot of places where maybe the algorithm you're looking for
isn't already in NumPy or already in JAX or something like that.
You need to do something new.
Projects like UMAP, which do really novel sort of clustering algorithms.
Or I just at SciPy, I learned more about a project called Stumpy,
which is for time series analysis.
Those authors were able to use Numba to take the numerical core of that project that was the sort of the time bottleneck and speed it up without having to leave Python.
And so that is, I think, really where Numba's most effective.
Sure. If you look at a lot of programs, there might be 5,000 lines of code or more, but even just something only as big as 5,000 lines.
There's a lot of code, but only a little bit of it really actually matters, right?
Yeah, that's what we find a lot is when you sit down and measure your code,
you'll spot some hotspots where 60 or 70 or 80% of your time is spent in just like three functions or something.
And that's great.
And if that's the case, that's great because you can just zero in on that section for speeding things up
and not ruin the readability of the rest of your program.
sometimes optimization can make it harder to read the result.
And so there's always a balance of you
have to keep maintaining this project.
You don't want to make it unreadable just to get 5% more
speed.
RICK VISCOMI: Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, absolutely.
Not just the readability, but the ability
to evolve it over time.
So maybe it's like, oh, we're going to compile this section
here using Numbo or Cython or something like that.
Well, maybe I was going to use this cool new IPI package I found,
but I can't just jam it in there where it's compiled.
That's unlikely to work well, right?
And things like that.
And so, yeah, a lot of times there's these big sections that look complicated.
They look slow.
They're not actually.
Yeah.
And one thing I also often emphasize for people is that
when you think about the time your program takes,
think about the time you spent working on it
as well as the time you spent running it.
And so because we've heard from a lot of projects who said they were able to get major speedups, not because necessarily because Numba compiled their code to be incredibly fast, but it compiled it to be fast enough that they could try new ideas quicker.
And so they got to the real win, which was a better way to solve their problem because they weren't kind of mired in just kind of boilerplate coding.
Right, right, right, right.
It turns out I learned I should use a dictionary and not a list.
and now it's 100 times faster.
And that wasn't actually a compiling thing.
That was a visibility thing or something, right?
- Yeah, try more things is always helpful.
And so a tool that lets you do that is really valuable.
- 100%.
So what tools do you recommend for knowing?
Because our human intuition sometimes is good,
but sometimes is really off the mark
in terms of thinking about what parts are slow,
what parts are fast.
- Yeah, that's something.
Definitely when I've talked to people,
Everyone thinks they know where the slow part is, but sometimes they're surprised.
And so you definitely, before you do anything, this is not just Numba advice.
This is any time before you're going to speed up your program, measure something.
So what you want is you want a representative benchmark, something that's not going to run too fast because often, you know, like unit tests run too quickly to really tell you to exercise the program in a realistic way.
So you want a benchmark that doesn't run too long, but maybe like five minutes or something.
And then you're going to want to run that through a profiling tool.
And there are several options.
I just usually tell people to use Cprofile.
It's built into the standard library in Python.
It's a great tool.
It does the job for most stuff.
And so sometimes you may, there may be other tools, things like SnakeViz and other things
that help you interpret the result of the profile, but often you'll use Cprofile to collect
the data.
And what this does is it samples, it sort of records as the program is running, what are
all the functions that are being called and how much time are they taking? And there are different
strategies for how to do this, but fundamentally what you get out is essentially a data set that
says 2% of the time in your program, this function was running and 3% of this function was running.
And you can just sort that in descending order and look and see what pops out at the top.
And sometimes you're surprised. Sometimes you find out it's actually, it wasn't my numerical code.
that I spent 80% of my time doing some string operation
that I didn't realize I needed to do over and over again.
Right, right, exactly.
Some weird plus equals with a string
was just creating a thousand strings
to get to the endpoint or something like that, yeah.
Yeah, and I could have just done that once up front.
So it's good to do the profiling
just to make sure there isn't an obvious problem
before you get into the more detailed optimization.
Yeah, before you start changing your code
completely its execution method or whatever yep yeah yeah and you know shout out to the PyCharm
folks they they've got to push the button to profile and they've got to visualize it and it
just runs c profile right in there so that's like c profile on easy mode you know you get a spreadsheet
and you get a graph what about other ones like um bill fil or anything yeah so any other recommendations
Yeah, so that's an interesting point is I've been the C profile is for compute time profiling. An interesting problem you run into is that what this tool does, which is data is memory profiling, which is often a problem when you're scaling up. And that's actually one of the other good things to keep in mind when you're optimizing is what am I trying to do? Am I trying to get done faster? Am I trying to save on compute costs? Am I trying to go bigger? And so I have to speed things up so that I have room to put more data in.
If that's where you're going, you might just out of memory.
Yeah.
Am I already stuck?
And so there it is very easy in Python to not recognize when you have temporary arrays and things, because, again, it's also very compact and you're not seeing what's getting allocated.
You can accidentally blow up your memory quite a lot.
And so this kind of a profiler is a great option for it.
What it can often show you is they'll kind of align by line.
This is how much memory was allocated in each line of your program.
So you can see, oh, that one line of pandas.
Oops.
That did it.
Yeah, I can't remember all the details.
I talked to Ipmar about this one,
but I feel like it also keeps track of the memory used.
even down into like NumPy and below, right?
Not just Python memory where it says now there's some opaque blob of data science stuff.
Yeah.
And actually, even on the compute profiling, there's sort of two approaches.
So C profile is focused on counting function time.
But sometimes you have a long function.
And if you're making a bunch of NumPy calls, you might actually care line by line how much time is being taken.
And that could be a better way to think about it.
And so I think the tool is called LineProf.
Yeah.
I forget the exact URL, but it's an excellent tool in Python for, there's one in R and there's
an equivalent one.
Yes.
LineProfile.
There you go.
It's archived.
Oh, it's archived.
Okay.
Yeah.
I have to find another tool now.
This is my go-to for so long.
I didn't realize it had already been archived.
Oh, there's a current.
Hey, if it still works, it's all good.
It's all good.
Yeah.
it's been transferred to a new location.
So that's where it lives now.
But yeah, line profiling is another.
I often use them complimentary sort of tools.
As I zero in on one function, that's with C profile.
And then I'll go line profile that function.
Oh, interesting.
Drilling further.
Yeah, like, okay, this is the general area.
Now let's really focus on it.
Memray is another one.
I talked to the folks from Bloomberg about that.
Oh, okay.
I have not used this one.
Yeah, this is a pretty new one.
And it's quite neat the way it works.
yeah this one actually tracks c and c plus plus and other other aspects of allocations as well so
one of the problems you can run into with profiling is especially memory profiling i think although
if you just want to know about memory but the more you monitor it the more it becomes kind of a
heisenberg quantum mechanics type thing once you observe it you change it and so the answers you
get by observing it are not actually what are happening. So you got to keep a little bit of
an open mind towards that as well, right? Yeah. And that's even a risk with, you know, other,
the compute side of the profiling is some, you're using some compute time to actually observe the
program, which means that it can, and these tools try to subtract out that bias, but it does
impact things. And so you, you may want to have kind of a benchmark that you can run as your kind
of real source of truth that you run without the profiler turned on just to see a final
runtime. Run with the profiler to break it down. And then when you're all done, you're going to
want to run that program again with the profiler off to see if you've actually
improved it wall clock time-wise. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. That's a really good point. It's just maybe do a percent time it type of thing.
Yep. Something along those lines.
Okay. Anything else we want to talk about that?
So let's, okay.
That was a little bit of a side deep dive into profiling
because before you apply some of these techniques
like Numba and others,
you certainly want to know where to apply it.
And part of that is you might need to rewrite your code
a little bit to make it more optimizable
by Numba or these things.
So first of all, what do you do to use Numba?
Right?
It's just you just put a decorator on there and out you go?
At the very simplest level, Numbers interface is supposed to be just one decorator.
Now, there's some nuance, obviously, and other things you can do, but we tried to get it
down to, for most people, it's just that.
And the N in NGIT means no Python, meaning we get this code is not calling the Python
interpreter anymore at all.
It is purely machine code, no interpreter access.
Interesting.
- Okay, so some of these like compile,
you know, do a thing and compile your Python code
to machine instructions.
I feel like they still interact with like
PyObject pointers and they still kind of work
with the API of the Python data types.
- Yeah.
- Which is nice, but it's a whole lot slower
of an optimization than now it's in 32 and it's, you know,
float 32 and these are on registers, you know?
Yeah, and this is part of the reason why Numba focuses on numerical code is that NumPy arrays and actually other arrays in PyTorch and other things that support the buffer protocol.
So really when Numba compiles this, it compiles sort of two functions.
One is a wrapper that handles the transition from the interpreter into no Python land, as we call it.
And then there's the core function that is kind of like you could have written in C or Fortran or something.
And that wrapper is actually doing all the PyObject stuff.
It's reaching in and saying, ah, this integer, I'm going to pull out the actual number.
And oh, this NumPy array, I'm going to reach in and grab the data pointer and pass those
down into the core where the actual all the math happens.
And so that is, so the only time you interact with the interpreter is really at the edge.
And then once you get in there, you try not to touch it ever again.
Now, NumPy does have a feature that we added some years ago called an object mode block,
which lets you in the middle of your NoPython code,
go back and actually start talking to the interpreter again.
Right.
Maybe use a standard library feature or something.
Yeah.
The most common use we've seen is you want a progress bar to update or something.
That's not in your hot loop.
You don't want to be going back to the interpreter
in something that's really performance critical.
But inside of a function, you might have parts that are more or less,
one out of a million iterations.
I want to go update the progress bar or something.
That's totally valid.
And you can do that with Numba.
There's a way to get back to the interpreter if you really need to.
Okay.
Yeah, and it says it takes and translates Python functions
to optimize machine code at runtime, which is cool.
So that makes deploying it super easy.
And you don't have to have compiled wheels for it and stuff.
Using industry standard LLVM compilers.
And then similar speeds to C is in Fortran.
Yeah.
Which is awesome, but also has implications, if I can speak.
For example, when I came to Python, I was blown away that I could just have integers as big as I want.
If I keep adding to them, they just get bigger and bigger.
Billions, bazillions of bits of accuracy.
it came from C++ and C#,
and where you explicitly said it's an N32,
it's an N64, it's a double,
and these all had ranges of valid numbers,
and then you got weird wraparounds,
and maybe you create an unsigned one,
so you can get a little bit bigger.
I suspect that you may fall victim
or be subjected to these types of limitations
without realizing them in Python if you add NGedit
because you're back in that land, right?
Right. Or do you guys magic to allow us?
We do not, we do not handle the big integer,
which is what you're describing as sort of that,
that integer that can grow without bound.
Because our target audience is very familiar with NumPy,
NumPy looks at numbers sort of the way you're,
you described from C++ and other languages.
The D type and all that stuff, right?
Yeah. NumPy arrays always have a fixed size integer and you get to pick what
that is, but it has to be eight, 16, 32, 64.
Some machines can handle bigger, but that it is fixed.
And so once you've locked that in, you can't over, if you, if you go too big, you'll just
wrap around and overflow.
And so, yeah, so that limitation is definitely present again in Numba, but fortunately, NumPy
users are already familiar with thinking that way.
So it isn't an additional constraint on them too much.
Right.
Okay.
And then one thing he said was that you should focus on using arrays.
Yes.
And that kind of data structures before you apply Numba JIT compilation to it.
Does that mean list as in bracket bracket or these numpy type vector things?
We all have different definitions.
Yes, that's true.
What an array is.
I would say generally, yeah, usually the go-to I talk to about is a numpy array.
So it has a shape.
The nice thing, you know, numpy arrays can be multidimensional.
So you can represent a lot of complex data that way.
But within an array, there's a fixed element size.
That element could be a record.
So if you want for every cell in your array to store maybe a set of numbers or a pair of numbers,
you can do that with custom D types and things.
And Numba will understand that.
But that's basically, that's the ideal data structure.
Numba does have, we added support a couple years ago for other data structures
because the downside to a Numpy array is that it's fixed size.
Once you make it, you can't append to it like you can a Python list.
So Numba does have support for both what we call typed lists and typed dictionaries.
So these are sort of special cases of lists and dictionaries in Python where in the case of a list, every element in the list has the same type.
Or in the case of a dictionary, the keys are all the same type and the values are all the same type.
And those cover a lot of the cases where, again, when users want to make things where they don't know how long it's going to be, you're going to append in the algorithm.
A list is a much more natural thing than an umpire array where you might over allocate or something.
And dictionaries, our dictionary implementation is basically taken straight from CPython's dictionary implementation.
So it's very tuned and very fast in the same way CPython's is.
We just had to modify it a little bit to add this type information.
but it's um it's really good for kind of look up random items uh kind of stuff so those are
available as additional data structures in addition to yeah and to use those i would say
from number import something something like this yeah they're they're they're a new type in the
yeah in the in the docs i'll show you you can sort of import a typed list as a special class
that you can create.
The downside, by the way, is that,
and the reason we have those
and we don't just take,
historically nobody used to try
and let you pass in a Python list,
is that wrapper function would have to go recursively
through the list of lists of lists
of whatever you might have
and pop out all of the elements
into some format that wasn't all PyObjects
so that the no Python code
could manipulate them quickly.
And then how do you put it all back
if you modify that sort of shadow data structure?
And so what we realized is that was confusing people and actually added a lot of overhead and calling functions took too long.
So we instead went up a level and said, OK, we're going to make a new kind of list that you at the interpreter level can opt into for your algorithm.
And so accessing that list from Python is slower than a Python list.
But accessing it from Numba is like 100 times faster.
So you kind of have to decide while I'm in this mode,
I'm optimizing for numbers performance,
not for the Python interpreter performance.
Which is reasonable often, I'd imagine,
because this is the part you found to be slow.
Yeah, that's the trade-off you make.
And so, yeah.
So we would not suggest people use typelist
just in random places in their program.
I heard this is fast.
So we're just going to replace all, like, new rule,
bracket bracket is disallowed.
We're now using this one, right?
Yeah, when you're working with Python objects,
Python's data structures can't be beat.
They are so well-tuned that it's very, very hard
to imagine something that could be faster than them.
All right, so maybe one more thing on Numbo
we could talk about is, so far,
I imagine people have been in their mind thinking of,
I have at least, running on CPUs,
be that on Apple Silicon or Intel chips or AMD or whatever.
But there's also support for graphics cards, right?
Yes.
Yeah.
So for a very long, I mean, we've had this again for 10 plus years.
We were very early adopters of CUDA, which is the programming interface for NVIDIA GPUs.
CUDA is supported by every NVIDIA GPU, whether it's a low-end gamer card or a super high-end data center card.
They all support CUDA.
So that was really nice for people who were trying to get into GPU programming.
You could use inexpensive hardware to learn.
And so on both Windows and Linux, Macs don't have NVIDIA GPUs for a long, long time now.
But on Windows and Linux, you can basically write what they call a CUDA kernel in pure Python.
And you can pass up arrays, either NumPy arrays, which then have to be sent to the card, or special GPU arrays that are already on the card.
And so that is a great way for people to learn a bit more about GPU programming.
I will say Numba might not be the best place to start with GPU programming in Python because
there's a great project called Coupy, C-U-P-Y, that is literally a copy of NumPy,
but does all of the computation on the GPU. And Coupy works great with Numba. So I often tell
people if you're curious, start with Coupy, use some of those NumPy functions to get a sense of,
when is an array big enough to matter on the GPU, that sort of thing.
And then when you start wanting to do more custom algorithms,
numbers where you kind of turn to for that second level.
Yeah.
So I feel like I'm referencing a lot of it Mars work over here, but
what if we didn't have a NVIDIA GPU? Is there anything we could do?
Yeah. So there are other projects. So things like that I mentioned here,
like PyTorch and things are,
have been ported to a number of different backends.
This is one thing the Numba team,
we are frequently talking about
is how do we add non-NVIDIA GPU support?
But it's, I don't have an ETA on that.
That's something that we just still are thinking about.
But PyTorch, definitely.
And you can use PyTorch as an array library.
You don't have to be doing machine learning necessarily.
You can use it just for fast arrays.
It's just most popular for,
Because it supports, I mean, Jax is a very similar thing
because it adds the extra features you want
for those machine learning models.
But at the core of every machine learning model,
it's just array math.
And so you could choose to just do that
if that's what you want.
And then you could even still pass those arrays
off to Numba at some point in the future.
Because we all understand each other's protocols.
Yeah, I didn't realize there was integration
with that as well.
Yeah, a while back,
we kind of worked with a number of projects
to define a GPU array interface
that's used by a number of them
so that we can see each other's arrays without having to copy the data, which is very helpful.
Yeah, yeah.
We have a lot more topics than the number, but I'm still fascinated with it.
Oh, yeah.
So, you know, one of the big, all the rages, all the rage now is vector databases,
obviously, because I want to query my way through LLM outputs.
Like where in 100,000 dimensional space does this question live?
Or whatever.
Is there any integration with that kind of stuff back into Numba?
Numba, not directly.
Although Numba does have interfaces, an easy way to call out to C functions.
So a lot of these vector databases are implemented in C or C++ or something.
And so if you did have a use case where you needed to call out to one of them,
if there was a C function call to make directly to sort of the underlying library
that bypassed the interpreter, you can do that from Numba.
And so I haven't seen anyone do that yet, but it's a generic sort of C interface.
Yeah, maybe there's a database driver written in C, in which case, you know, I don't know all the different databases.
I know there are some that are specifically built for it.
Maybe DuckDB has got something going on here.
But also MongoDB has added vector stuff to it, and I know they have a C library as well.
Yeah, I've looked at LanceDB is one I've seen mentioned by used by a couple of projects.
That's just for vector.
Which one is it called?
It doesn't do anything else.
LanceDB.
Okay.
Yeah, I heard about it in the context of another Python LLM project.
Sure.
Okay.
Cool.
Well, that's news to me, but it is a developer-friendly open source database for AI.
Okay.
Brilliant.
All right.
Well, like I said, we have more things to talk about.
So many things.
This is super.
Okay.
One more thing I want to ask you about here before we go on.
This has a Cython feel to it.
Can you compare and contrast Numba to Cython?
Yeah.
So Cython sort of requires you to put in some type information in order to be able to generate C code that is more efficient.
Numba is mainly focused on type inference.
So we try to figure out all the types in your function
based on the types of the inputs.
And so in general, although Numba has places
where you can put type annotations,
we generally discourage people from doing it
because we find that it adds work and is error prone
and doesn't really help the performance in the end.
Numba will figure out all the types directly.
And so when it compiles it, if it comes in,
if you call it twice with different types,
does it just say,
well, now we're going to need
this version of the function underscore strings list
rather than integers list or something?
Yeah, every number compiled function
actually contains a dispatcher
that will look at the argument types
and pick the right one.
And it's at pretty high granularity.
For example,
people who are familiar with multidimensional arrays
in like Fortran and C
know that they lay out the rows and columns
in a different order,
which has impact on how you do loops and stuff
for kind of to maximize locality.
Numba can tell the difference between those two cases
and will generate different code for those two cases.
Wow.
So this is something you as the user don't want to even know.
No, you don't want to worry about that.
That's a whole other level.
So you were like, okay, well, if it's laid out in this order,
it's probably this, it appears on the local cache
for the CPU in this way.
And so if we loop in that direction,
will like iterate through the cache instead of blow through it every loop or something like that
basically we want to make sure that llvm knows when the step size is one and that's either on the row
or the column axis depending on that and because because i mean compilers in general are magic like
we are grateful that llvm exists because they can do so many tricks at that level i mean because i
mean this is the same thing that powers clang and other stuff so you know all of all of mac os
compilers are built on LLVM.
And so we can leverage all of the tricks
they've figured out in decades of development.
Yeah, that's cool.
And Python itself is compiled with that,
at least on macOS.
I just saw last night that I have clang some version,
whatever, and I was just looking at the version
for my Python.
I was compiled with that.
Cool.
Okay.
So what is next?
Let's talk about, we've been on the number JIT.
Yep.
Anthony Shaw wrote an article, Python 3.13 gets a JIT.
And this is a pretty comprehensive and interesting article on what's going on here.
What's your experience with this JIT coming to Python 3.13?
Yeah, this is, and they've definitely tried to set expectations here,
that this first release is really planting a flag.
is to say, we're going to start building on top of this base.
And so as far as I've seen, the benchmarks for 3.13
are not going to be, you know,
light the world on fire kind of stuff.
We're not throwing away RC code
and rewriting operating systems and jitted Python.
But you have to take a first step.
And this is honestly pretty...
It impressed me because Numba as a library
we can take a lot of risks and do things that I know we can depend on LLVM.
We can do all sorts of stuff that may be not work for everyone,
because if it, if Numba doesn't solve your problem, you just don't use it.
You can just leave it out of your environment. You don't have to install it.
And so it's easy to kind of us to zero in on just the problems that we're good
at and say, if there, you know, if this doesn't solve your problem,
just leave us out.
When you actually are putting a JIT into the core interpreter,
everyone gets it and you have to consider, and Python is so broad.
that you could grab two Python experts
and they may actually have nothing in common with each other
but are both equal claim to being experts at using Python
but they might use them in different domains
and have different libraries they care about and all of that.
I feel that way when I talk to Pandas people
and I think about me doing web development APIs and stuff.
I'm like, I think I'm really good at Python generally,
good enough to write good apps.
But then I look at this, I'm like,
I don't even really, some of these expressions that go into the filter brackets, I'm like,
I didn't even know that that was possible or really how to apply.
You know, like it's just, it's weird to both feel really competent and understand it,
but also have it kind of no idea.
And what I think what you're getting at is those are two really different use cases
and they're getting the same JIT and it has to work for both of them.
But, you know, combinatorially explode that problem, right?
Yeah. And, you know, all the different hardware.
I mean, Numba supports a lot of different computers, but not everyone that Python supports.
Like MicroPython.
Yeah. Or we don't work on, you know, HP UX or anything like that necessarily.
So, you know, Python has an enormous support range of supported platforms, an enormous set of use cases.
And any anything you do is going to affect everyone.
And so so this approach, which I would say this copy and patch JIT approach is really clever because one of the, you know, again,
Numba has to bring, we build a custom version of LLVM.
It's a little stripped down, but it's mostly still there.
So we have to bring that along for the ride.
That's a heavy, heavy dependency
to put on the core interpreter for everyone.
So the clever bit here is they figured out
how to have a JIT,
but still do all the compiler stuff at build time.
So when you build this copy and patch JIT,
you actually need LLVM, but only at build time.
And then it can go away.
And so the person who receives the interpreter
doesn't need LLVM anymore.
So they've basically built for themselves a bunch of little template fragments.
This is the patching part is basically you're saying,
I've got a bunch of fragments that implement different opcodes in the bytecode different ways.
And I'm going to string them together and then go in.
And there's a bunch of fill in the blank spots that I can go in and swap in the,
okay, you get your value from here and then you put it over here and all that.
but the actual machine code was generated by LLVM
by the person who built Python in the first place.
And it just amazes me this works.
And I'm excited to see where they go with it
because it was a clever way to avoid
adding a huge heavy dependency to Python
but start to get some of that JIT benefit.
So it looks at some of the common patterns.
I see, okay, we're looping over a list of loads
or something and replaces that with more native code
or something along those lines?
Yeah, you essentially have a compiler
from a bunch of little recipes that are,
if I do this pattern, sub in this machine code,
fill in these blanks, and you just have a table of them.
So the challenge there is that there is
a combinatorial explosion again of how many different,
a full-blown compiler like LLVM has a bunch of rules.
It's rule-based.
And so it's saying, if I see this pattern, I do this replacement and it keeps doing all of this.
And then at the end, it says, OK, now I'm going to generate my machine code from that.
Those transformations. If I don't have LLVM at runtime, I have to kind of figure out what are the best templates up front, put them in this table.
And then, you know, so this is where honestly looking at different usage patterns will probably be a huge help is in practice.
You could have any sequence of byte codes, but in reality, you're probably going to have certain ones a lot.
And those are the ones you want to focus on.
So I think once we, I don't know, you know, once we start getting this out in the community and start getting feedback on it, I'm curious to see how rapidly it can evolve.
That'll be really interesting.
Yeah.
And this whole copy and patch it, JIT, is, you know, we often hear people say, I'm a computer, I have a computer science degree.
And I think what that really means is I have a software engineering degree or I am a software engineering person.
they are not often creating new science computer science of theories they're more like i really
understand how operating system works and programmers and compilers and i i write you
know json api sorry i talk to databases but this is this is like true new research out of
legitimate computer science right yeah i mean yeah they mentioned i mean they cite a paper from 2021
and in computer science going from paper to implementation in one of the most popular
languages on earth in three years seems pretty fast it does seem pretty fast right it definitely
seems pretty fast and the reason i bring this up is i imagine that dropping it into one of the
most popular programming languages with a super diverse set of architectures and use cases will
probably push that science forward.
Yep.
Yeah.
This will be tested in one of the most intense environments you could imagine.
You know, I mean, whatever they did for their research paper or their dissertation or whatever,
this is another level of putting it into tests and experimentation to put it into Python.
Yep.
Yeah.
Wild.
Okay.
Hopefully this speeds things up.
This is going to be interesting because it just happens.
It just happens, if you have Python 3.13, it's going to be looking at its patterns and possibly swapping out these recipes.
Yeah, and this is complementary to all of the techniques the FasterCPython folks have been doing all along for many releases now.
They've been looking at other ways to speed up the interpreter without going all the way to a full-blown compiler, which this is kind of giving you the final steps.
So that's, again, another interesting place is how does this complement those?
I don't know those details, but it's another tool in the toolbox to sort of go back to the beginning.
Speed is about having a bunch of tools and you kind of pick up 5% here and 5% there and you pile up enough 5% and pretty soon you have something substantial.
Yeah, absolutely.
That was the plan, right?
the faster CPython was to make it multiples of times faster by adding 20% improvements,
release over release over release and compounding percentages basically.
The one thing I don't know about this is we've had this specializing adaptive interpreter that
was one of those faster CPython things that came along. Is this just the next level of that or is
a replacement for that i i don't know i'm sure people can yeah i don't know i don't know what
the what their roadmap is for that because i think part of this is this is so new i think they got to
see how it works in practice right right before they start feeling yeah i agree it feels like an
alternative to that specialized and adaptive interpreter but
i don't know maybe some of the stuff they've learned from one made it made it possible or
even as just an extension of it.
Okay.
What do we want to talk about next here?
I think...
You want to talk about threads?
No, I want to talk about rust really quick
before we talk about it.
That'll be quick, and then I want to talk about threads
because threads will not be as quick,
and it's super interesting.
It's been a problem that people have been chipping at
for years and years and years, the threads thing.
But what do you think about all this Rust mania?
I mean, it's shown some real positive results,
things like Ruff and Pydantic and others.
But it's actually a little bizarrely controversial,
or maybe not bizarrely, non-obviously controversial.
Yeah, I mean, my take on the Rust stuff
is I view it in the same light as when we use C and Fortran.
Historically, it's just Rust is a nicer language in many ways.
And so if being a nicer language means
it's certainly, you know, you could have taken any of these things and rewritten them and see a long
time ago and they would have been faster. You just didn't want to write that C code.
Exactly. And so we could do this in assembler and you would fly guys.
Yeah. And so, so Rust is moving things, Rust lowering the bar to saying, okay, maybe I'll
implement the core of my algorithm outside of Python entirely is, is interesting. And honestly,
I would happily see Rust completely replace C as the dominant extension language in Python.
The trade-off here, and this is one of those things that's sometimes easy to forget, again,
because the Python community is so diverse, is when you do switch something to Rust, you do
reduce the audience who can contribute effectively in some cases. Using Python to implement things
has a benefit for the maintainers if it lets them get more contributions, more easily onboard new
people. We hear this, I hear this a lot actually from academic software where you have this constant
rotating, you know, students and postdocs and things. And so how quickly you can onboard someone
who isn't a professional software developer into a project to contribute to it is relevant. And so,
but I think it's a different, it's different for every project. There are some things like,
Like, you know, again, Rust in cryptography makes total sense to me because that's also a very security conscious thing.
You really don't want to be dealing with C-buffer overflows in that kind of code.
And so the guarantees Rust offers are valuable also.
Well, and I think that that's also makes sense even outside of just security directly.
You're going to build a web server.
you know, it's a nerve-wracking thing
to run other people's code on an open port on the internet.
And so this is better.
One of the things I switched to is,
I recently switched to Granian.
Granian?
For a lot of my websites, which is a Rust ACP server.
It's comparable in performance,
slightly faster than other things,
But it's way more, its deviation from its average is way, way better.
So it's just more consistent.
More consistent, but also, yeah, like the average, for example,
the average, where's the versus third-party server?
That's the one I want.
So for against micro-Whiskey, for example, right?
It's six milliseconds versus 17 milliseconds.
Like, whatever.
But then you look at the max latency of 60 versus three seconds.
It's like, oh, hold on.
Right.
But the fact it's written in Rust, I think, feels it's a little bit of extra safety, all other things being equal.
I mean, obviously, a lot of caveats there.
Yeah.
Actually, the interesting point about, and this is not unique to Rust, this is, again, the same problem with C and other things, is that it's a little bit interesting.
On one hand, we're pushing the Python interpreter and JITS and all this other stuff.
at the same time as you're thinking about whether to pull code entirely out of Python.
And it creates a barrier where the JIT can't see what's in the Rust code.
And so if there was an optimization that could have crossed that boundary,
it's no longer available to the compilers.
Yeah.
This is a problem the Numba team has been thinking about a lot
because our number one request, aside from other GPUs,
is can Numba be an ahead-of-time compiler instead of a just-in-time compiler?
And we were like, superficially, yes, that's straightforward.
But then we started thinking about the user experience and the developer experience.
And there are some things that you lose when you go ahead of time that you have with the JIT.
And how do you bridge that gap?
Yeah, it gets tricky.
We've been trying to figure out some tooling to try and bridge that.
So at SciPy, we did a talk on a project we just started called Pixie, which is a subproject of Numba,
that is trying to, which doesn't have Rust support yet,
but that's been one of the requests.
So if you go to github.com/Numba slash Pixie.
Search engines are pure magic.
They really are.
Awesome.
Well, you found our issue tracker.
But yeah, but Pixie, we gave a talk about it at SciPy.
It's very early stages, but what we're trying to do
is figure out how to, in the ahead of time compilation,
whether that's C or Rust or even Numba eventually,
capturing enough info that we can feed that back into a future JIT so that the JIT can still see
what's going on in the compiled code as kind of a future proofing ecosystem. Yeah, that's cool.
I know some compilers have profiling based optimization type things. Like you can compile
it with some instrumentation, run it, and then take that output and feed it back into it. And I
have not, I don't know if I've ever practically done anything with that, but I'm like, oh, that's
kind of a neat idea to like yeah let it see what it does and then feed it back is this sort of like
that or what do you think yeah this is even this is different this is sort of um this is so so this
is basically capturing in the library file so you compiled ahead of time to a library capturing the
lvm bit code so that you could pull it out and embed it into your jet which is might be have
other lvm bit code so then you can optimize you can have a function you wrote in python that calls
a function in C, and you could actually optimize them together.
Even though they were compiled at different times,
implemented in different languages, you could actually cross that boundary.
One's like a ahead of time compilation, just standard compilation.
One is like a JIT thing, but it's like, oh, we're going to click it together
in the right ways.
Yeah, because JITs are nice in that they can see everything that's going on,
but then they have to compile everything that's going on, and that adds time and latency
and things.
And so can you have it both ways is really what we're trying to do.
it's nice when you can't have your cake and eat it too right yes
my cake before my vegetables and it'd be fine
uh i said that this rust thing was a little bit controversial i think there's
there's some just hey you're you're stepping on my my square of python space with a new tool
and i i i don't think that has anything to do with a rust per se it's just somebody came along
I made a tool that is now doing something maybe in better ways, or I don't know. I don't want to
start up a whole debate about that. But I think the other one is what you touched on is if we go
and write a significant chunk of this stuff in this new language, regardless what language it is,
Rust is a relatively not popular language compared to others. Then people who contribute to that,
either from the Python side, were like, well, there's this big chunk of Rust code now that I
don't understand anything about, so I can't contribute to that part of it.
And you might even say, well, what about the pro developers or the experienced core developers
and stuff?
They're experienced in pro at C in Python, which is also not Rust, right?
Like it's this new area that is more opaque to most of the community, which I think that's
part of the challenge.
Yeah.
That's, you know, do you, some people like learning new programming languages and some
don't.
And so on some hand, Rust can be,
this is a new intellectual challenge
and it fixes practically some problems you have with C.
Or in other cases, it's the,
I wanted to worry about what this project does
and not another programming language.
Right, right, right.
Kind of have to look at your communities
and decide what's the right trade-off for you.
Maybe in 10 years, CPython will be RPython
and it'll be written in Rust.
You know, I mean, that's,
if we move to WebAssembly
and like PyScript, Pyodid land a lot,
like having that right in,
there's a non-zero probability,
but it's not a high number, I suppose.
Speaking of something I also thought
was going to have a very near zero probability.
Yeah.
PEP703 is accepted.
Oh my goodness.
What is this?
Yeah.
So this was, you know, again,
a couple of years ago now,
or I guess a year ago,
it was finally accepted.
So this is,
so for since very long time,
The Python interpreter has, because, you know, again, threads are an operating system feature that let you do something in a program concurrently.
And now that all of our computers have, you know, four, eight, even more cores, depending on, you know, what kind of machine you have, even your cell phone has more than one core.
The using those those cores requires you have some kind of parallel computing in your program.
And so the problem is that you don't want, you know, once you start doing things in parallel, you have the potential for race conditions.
You have the two threads might do the same thing at the same time or touch the same data, get it inconsistent, and then your whole program starts to crash and other bad things happen.
So historically, the global interpreter lock has been the sort of sledgehammer protection of the CPython interpreter.
But the net result was that threads that were running pure Python code basically got no performance benefits.
You might get other benefits, like you could have one block on IO while the other one does stuff.
And so it was easier to manage that kind of concurrency.
But if you were trying to do compute on two cores at the same time in pure Python code, it was just not going to happen.
Because every operation touches a Python object has to lock the interpreter while you make that modification.
You could write all the multi-threaded code with locks and stuff you want, but it's really
just going to run one at a time anyway.
Yeah.
A little bit like preemptive multi-threading on a single core CPU or I don't know.
It's weird.
Like I've added all this complexity, but I haven't got much out of it.
The secret, of course, is that if your Python program contained not Python, like C or Cython
or Fortran, as long as you weren't touching Python objects directly, you could release
the GIL.
And so, you know, Python, so especially in the scientific and data computing and data science
space, multi-threaded code has been around for a long time and we've been using it and
it's fine.
Dask, you know, you can use workers with threads or processes or both.
And so I frequently will use Dask with four threads.
And that's totally fine because most of the codes in NumPy and Pandas that release the
GIL.
But that's only a few use cases.
And so if you want to expand that to the whole Python interpreter, you have to get rid of
the GIL.
You have to have a more fine-grained approach to concurrency.
And so this proposal from Sam Gross at Meta was basically one of many historical attempts to kind of make that, get rid of that global interpreter lock.
Many have been proposed and failed historically.
So getting this all the way through the approval process is a real triumph.
At the point where it was really being hotly contested,
my maybe slightly cynical take is,
we have between zero and one more chance
to get this right in Python.
Either it's already too late, or this is it.
And I don't know which it is.
I think there were two main complaints against this change.
Complaint number one was,
okay, you theoretically have opened up
a parallel compute thing.
So for example, on my Apple M2 Pro, I have 10 cores.
So I could leverage all of those cores, maybe get a five times improvement.
But single core regular programming is now 50% slower.
And that's what most people do.
And we don't accept it.
All right.
That's the one of the size, you know, the golectomy and all that was kind of in that realm, I believe.
The other is yet to be determined, I think, is much like the Python 2 to 3 shift, the problem with Python 2 to 3 wasn't that the code of Python changed.
It was that all the libraries I like and need don't work here.
And so what is going to happen when we take half a million libraries that were written in a world that didn't know or care about threading and are now subjected to it?
Yeah, and there's sort of two levels of problem there.
There's work that has to be done to libraries.
It's usually with C extensions that they assumed a global interpreter lock,
and they'll have to do some changes to change that.
But the other one is a much more cultural thing,
where the existence of the guild just meant that Python developers
just wrote less threaded code.
They don't think about locks, they don't worry about locks,
they just assume it's all going to be fine.
can because again the race condition doesn't protect threaded code from from uh the guild
doesn't protect thread code from race conditions but it just protects the interpreter from race
conditions so you in your application logic are free to make all the thread mistakes you want
but if no one ever ran your code in multiple threads you would never know and so i i think
that's a super interesting thing that it's a huge cultural issue that just people don't think about
it like i said i used to do a lot of c plus plus and C# and over there it's you're always
thinking about threading you're always thinking about well what about these three steps does it
go into a temporarily invalid state do i need to lock this right and like C# even had literally
a keyword lock which is like a context manager you say lock curly brace and everything in there is
like into a lock and out of like because it's just so part of that culture and then in python you
kind of just forget about it and don't worry about it but that doesn't mean that you aren't taking
multiple, like five lines of Python code, each one can run all on its own. But taken as a block,
they may still get into these like weird states where if another thread after three lines
observes the data, it's still busted, right? It's just the culture doesn't talk about it very much.
Yeah. If, you know, if no one ever runs your code in multiple threads, all of those bugs are
theoretical. And so it's, it's now what's going to shift is, you know, all of those C extensions
will get fixed and everything will be, you know, they'll, they'll, they'll fix those problems.
And then we're gonna have a second wave of everyone seeing their libraries used in threaded
programs and starting to discover what are the more subtle bugs? Do I have global state
that I'm not being careful with? And it's, it's gonna, it's going to be painful, but I think it's
necessary for Python to stay relevant into the future. I'm a little worried. I mean, one of the
common questions we hear is sort of, why is this, multi-processing is fine, why don't we do that?
And definitely multi-processing's big challenge is processes don't get to share data directly.
So either, you know, even if I have like read-only data, I might, if I have to load two gigabytes of
data in every process and I want to start 32 of them because I have a nice big computer,
I've just 32X my data, my memory usage, just so that I can, you know, have multiple concurrent computations.
Now, there are tricks you can play on things like Linux where you load the data once and rely on forking to preserve pages of memory.
Linux does cool copy on write stuff when you fork.
But that's like fragile and not necessarily going to work.
And then the second thing, of course, is if any of those have to talk to each other, now you're talking about pickling objects and putting them through a socket and handing them off.
and that is again for certain kinds of applications
just a non-starter
yeah people just start going well we're just going to rewrite this in a language
that lets us share pointers
or at least memory in process
yeah there's again there are a lot of Python users
where this they don't need this they don't care about this
this will never impact them and then there's a whole class of Python users
who are desperate for this
I think there's a couple interesting things here
one
that this i think this is important for stemming people leaving python i actually don't hear this
that much anymore but i used to hear a lot of we've left for go because we need better parallelism
or we've left for this performance reason and i don't know that's just a success story
of the faster c python initiative or all the people who had been around and decided they needed
to leave they're gone and they we just don't hear them anymore because they left it's like
you know i used to hear them say this at the party but they said they're going to leave and i don't
hear anyone say they're leaving well it's because everyone's still here didn't say that i don't know
but i do think having this as a capability will be important for people to be able to
maybe adopt python where python was rejected at the proposal stage you know like should we use
Python for this project or something else?
We need threading. We need computational threading.
We've got 128 core.
It's out.
Then no one comes and complains about it because they never
even started that process.
So it'll either allow more people to come
into Python or prevent them for
leaving for that same argument
on some projects. I think that's a pretty
positive thing here.
Yeah, we don't get to count all
of the projects that didn't come into existence
because of
when you're in it to sort of adjust your thinking to not see the limitation anymore because you're
so used to routing around it. You don't even stop and think, oh man, I got to worry about threads.
You just don't think threads. Yeah. I'll give, I totally agree. And I'll give people two other
examples that maybe resonate more if this doesn't resonate with them. It's the, what have I said?
oh, it's a little bit challenging to write this type of mobile phone application in Python.
Like, well, it's nearly impossible to write a mobile phone application in Python.
So we're not even focusing on that as an issue because no one is, I know, Beware and a few
other things there, there's a little bit of work.
So I don't want to just, I don't want to like, I'm not trying to talk bad about them, but
as a community, there's not like, it's not a React Native sort of thing or a Flutter
where there's a huge community of people who are just like,
and we could do this.
There's just not a lot of talk about it.
And that doesn't mean that people wouldn't just love
to write mobile apps in Python.
It's just so far out of reach
that it's just a little whisper in the corner
for people trying to explore that rather than a big din.
And I think, same thing about desktop apps, right?
Wouldn't it be awesome if we could not have Electron,
But like some really cool, super nice UI thing that's almost pure Python, it would.
But people were not focused on it because no one's trying to do it.
But no one's trying to do it because there weren't good options to do it with, right?
And I think the same story is going to happen around performance.
I mean, yeah, just to jump in, you know, since I have to talk about the Beware folks.
I mean, you've described exactly the reason why we fund the Beware development is because, yeah, if we don't work on that now before people sort of, you know, there's a lot of work that has to do.
before you reach that point where it's easy.
And so recently the team was able to get
sort of tier three support for iOS and Android
into CPython 313.
So now we're at the first rung of the ladder
of iOS and Android support in CPython.
- That's awesome.
- And Toga and Briefcase, the two components of Beware
are really focused again on that.
Yeah, how do I make apps?
For desktop and mobile.
And so, but it's, yeah, we ran into people
is that they just didn't even realize
you could even think about doing that.
And so they just, they never stopped to say,
oh, I wish I could do this in Python
because they just assumed you couldn't.
And so-
And all the people who really needed to,
like were required to leave the ecosystem
and make another choice, right?
And it will take the same amount of,
I was gonna say, it'll take the same amount of time with this.
Even once threads are possible in Python,
it'll take years to shift the perception.
Yeah, and probably some of the important libraries.
Yeah.
All right.
So I'm pretty excited about this.
I was hoping something like this would come,
and I didn't know what form it would be.
I said there were the two limitations,
the libraries and the culture,
which you called out very awesomely,
and then also the performance.
And this one is either neutral
or a little bit better in terms of performance.
So it doesn't have that disqualifying killing
of the single-threaded performance.
And then the approach I'm taking here, I will say again, because you have to be fairly conservative with CPython because so many people use it, is that this will be an experimental option that by default, Python won't turn this on.
You will have Python 3.13 when you get it, will still have the global interpreter lock.
But if you build Python 3.13 yourself or you get another kind of experimental build of it, there's a flag now at the build stage to turn off the GIL.
So in this mode, they decided to not have to make double negatives.
This is Python in free threading mode.
And that will be an experimental thing for the community to test, to try out, to benchmark, and do all these things for a number of years.
They've taken a very measured approach.
And they're saying, we're not going to force the whole community to switch to this until it's proven itself out.
Everyone's had time to port the major libraries to try it out,
to see that it really does meet the promise of not penalizing
single threaded stuff too much.
Yeah.
Or breaking one single threaded code too much. Yeah.
Yeah. And so so the steering council is reserving
right to decide when this becomes or if this becomes the official way for Python.
You know, I don't know, 317 or something.
I mean, it could be it could be several years.
And so I just want everyone not to panic.
Yeah, exactly.
This doesn't get turned on in October.
No, and this is super interesting.
Yeah, so it's accepted,
but it only appears in your Python runtime
if you build it with this.
So I imagine some people will build it themselves,
but someone will also just create a Docker container
with Python built with this,
and you can get the free-threaded Docker version
or whatever, right?
we've already put out conda packages as well.
So if you want to build a conda environment,
yeah, actually, if you jump over to the,
the pie free thread page.
Yeah. Tell, tell people about this.
Yeah. So, so, you know, we didn't make this,
this is the community made this,
the scientific Python community put this together.
And this is a really great resource,
again, focused on, you know, that,
that community, which really wants threading.
Cause we have a lot of, you know,
heavy numerical computation.
And so this is a good resource for things like,
how do you install it?
So there's a link there on what are your options for installing the free threaded CPython.
You can get it from Ubuntu or Pyenv or Conda.
If you go look at the, you know, and you can build it from source.
And so there's also a compatibility status tracker, which is being updated manually to
see which of your, you know, again, this is focused.
I think, yeah, down one more link.
Where's the, oh, there it is.
Yeah, there it is.
Yeah.
So these are, again, this is very focused on the kind of things the scientific Python community cares about.
But these are things like, you know, have we ported Cython?
Have we ported NumPy?
Is it being automatically tested?
Which release has it?
And the nice thing actually is pip as of 24.1, I believe, can tell the difference between wheels for regular Python and free-threaded Python.
Oh, you can tell by the, there's different wheels as well?
Yeah, yeah.
So there's a Python has always had this thing called an ABI tag, which is just a letter that you stick after the version number.
And T is the one for free threading.
And so now you a project can choose to upload wheels for both versions and make it easier for people to test out stuff.
So, for example, I mean, Cython, it looks like there are nightly wheels already being built.
And so this is, you know, they're moving fast and, you know, definitely, you know, and I kind of we're also very interested in getting into this as well.
so that's why we built the conda package for free threading and we're going to start looking at
building more conda packages for these things in order to be able to facilitate testing because
i think the biggest thing we want to make sure is if you want to know if your code works you want
the quickest way to get an environment to have some place to test yeah and so making this more
accessible to folks is a really high priority this is cool there was something like this for python
2 to 3, I remember, showed the top 1,000 packages on PyPI.
And then how many of them were compatible with Python 3,
basically by expressing their language tag or something like that?
Yep.
So this is kind of like that.
It's also like the can I use.
I don't know if you're familiar with that.
Can I use from the web dev world?
Oh, yeah.
Oh, awesome.
Yeah, I've seen this.
You go and say, I want to use this.
I want to use this feature.
And if I want to say web workers or something like that,
it'll show you all the browsers and all the versions.
And when were they supported?
And this sounds a little bit like that,
but for free-threaded Python.
Which, by the way, free-threaded Python
is the terminology, right?
Not no-gil, but free-threaded.
That is what they've decided.
I think they're worried about people trying to talk about no-no-gil
or-- I don't know.
GIL-ful?
GIL-ful Python?
Are you writing on the GIL-ful?
Oh, my gosh.
Okay, interesting.
Now, we have a few other things to talk about,
but we don't have really much time to talk about them.
But there was one thing that we were maybe going to talk about a bit
with compiling.
You mentioned some talk or something where people were talking about,
what if we had a static-languaged Python and we compiled it?
And related to that, Mr. Magnetic says,
could a Python program be compiled into a binary like a JAR
or a Go app or whatever.
Yeah, there are other tools that look at that
as a standalone executable.
So yeah, one of the things I just wanted to shout out
a colleague of mine at Anaconda, Antonio Cuney,
who is a well-known PyPy developer from long ago.
He's worked on PyPy for 20 years.
He's been-
And not the package installing thing,
but the JIG compiler, PYPY, PYPY.
Sometimes phonetically, like over audio,
that's hard to tell.
Yes, yeah, yeah.
So he's been thinking about this stuff for a very long time.
And his sort of key insight that at least clicked in my head was that Python is hard to compile because it is so dynamic.
I can, in principle, modify the attributes, like even the functions of a class at any point in the execution of the program.
I can marquee patch anything.
can do this. This dynamicness is really great for making kind of magical metaprogramming libraries
that do do amazing things with very little typing, but it makes compiling them really hard
because you don't get to ever say, okay, this can't ever change. and so what he's been
trying to do with a project called spy, which he gave a talk on at PyCon 2024, but I think the,
the recordings aren't up yet for that. and so there isn't a, I don't think there's a public
page on it, but he does have a talk on it. And because I think they've got like the keynotes up,
but the key kind of insight for me for spy was to recognize that in a typical Python program,
all the dynamic meta programming happens at the beginning. You're doing things like data classes,
generating stuff and all kinds of things like that. And then there's a phase where that stops.
And so if we could define a sort of variant of Python
where those two phases were really clear,
then you would get all of the dynamic expressiveness,
almost all the dynamic expressiveness of Python,
but still have the ability to then feed that
into a compiler tool chain and get a binary.
So this is super early R&D experimental work,
but I think that's a really great way to approach it
because often there's always been this tension of,
well, if I make Python statically compilable,
is it just C with different keywords?
Do I lose the thing I loved about Python,
which was how quickly I could express my idea?
And so this is, again,
to having your cake and eating it too.
This is trying to find a way to split that difference
in a way that lets us get most of the benefits of both sides.
That's pretty interesting.
And hopefully that talks up soon.
That would be really neat.
Maybe by the time this episode's out.
I know the PyCon videos are starting to roll.
Not out on YouTube, but out on the podcast channels.
It'll be interesting.
It would be fantastic to have,
here's my binary of Python.
Take my data science app and run it.
Take my desktop app and run it.
I don't care what you have installed on your computer.
I don't need you to set up Python 3.10
or higher on your machine
and set up a virtual environment.
Just here is my binary.
Yes.
As you will.
That's another, I throw that in with the mobile apps
and the front end or the desktop apps
or the front end Python.
You know, that's another one of those things
that it's nobody's pushing towards it.
Not that many people are pushing towards it
because there's not that many use cases for it
that people are using it for
because it was so challenging
that people start trying to do that, you know?
Yeah, that's one thing I also, you know, people probably hear me say this too many times,
but the, you know, most people encounter, most people use apps when they use a computer,
not packages or environments.
And so in the Python space, we are constantly grappling with how hard packages and environments
are to work with, talk with, you know, decide again, what languages are in, what, you know,
do I care about everything or just Python or whatever.
it's all very hard but that's actually not how most people interact with the computer at all
and so um it really is one of those things again this is one of the reasons i'm so interested in
beware is briefcase is like the app packager and uh the more they can push on that the more we have
a story um again there are other tools that have been around for a long time but that's just what i
think about a lot um but is we need to focus on tools for making apps because that's how we're
going to share our work with 99% of the earth.
Yes.
Yeah.
A hundred percent.
I totally agree.
And lots, lots of props to Keith Russell McGee and the folks over at Beware for doing that.
And for you guys supporting that work, because it's, it's one of those things where there's
not a ton of people trying to do it.
It's not like, well, we're using Django, but is there another way we could do it?
It's basically the same thing, right?
There it's creating a space for Python where it kind of, I know there's PyInstaller and
app but it's it's pretty limited right yeah there's not a lot of effort there and so it's it's there
are a few people who've been doing it for a long time and others are getting more into it and and
yeah so it's i just yeah i wish that we could get more focus on it because there's um there are
tools they're just don't get a lot of attention yeah and they're not very polished and there's so
many edge cases and uh scenarios all right let's close it out with just final thought on this little
topic and then uh let you wrap this up for us do you do you think that's maybe a a core developer
thing i mean i know it's awesome that pi do app and pi installer and pi freeze are doing their
things that toga are doing doing their things to try to make this happen but i've i feel like they're
kind of looking in at python and go like how can we grab what we need out of python and jam it into
an executable and make it work like should we be encouraging the core developers to just go like a
a Python MyScript --windows?
And they're out, you get in.exe or something.
I don't know, actually, that'd be a great question.
Actually, I would ask Russell that question.
He would have probably better perspective than I would.
Because at some level, it is a tool that is dealing with a lot of problems
that aren't core to the Python language.
And so maybe having it outside is helpful.
But maybe there are other things that the core could do to support it.
I mean, again, a lot of it has to do with, you know, the realities of when you drop an application onto a system, you need it to be self-contained.
You need to, you know, sometimes you have to, you know, do you have to trick the import library to know where to find things and all of that?
That's exactly what I was thinking is, right?
If Python itself didn't require like operating system level fakes to make it think.
If it could go like, here is a thing in memory where you just import.
This is the import space.
It's this memory address for these things.
And we just run from the EXE rather than dump a bunch of stuff
temporarily on disk, import it, throw it--
that kind of weirdness that happens sometimes.
Yeah, there is probably definitely improvements
that could be made to the import mechanism
to support applications.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, we've planted that seed.
Maybe it will grow.
We'll see.
All right, Stan, this has been an awesome conversation.
Give us a wrap up on all this stuff,
just sort of find a call to action
and summary of what you guys are doing at Anaconda.
because there's a bunch of different stuff we talked about that are in this space.
Yeah. I mean, mainly I would say I would encourage people that, you know, if you,
if you want to speed up your Python program, you don't necessarily have to leave Python.
Go, go take a look at some of these tools, go, you know, measure what your,
measure what your program's doing, look at tools like Numbo, but there are other ones out there,
you know, PyTorch and Jaxx and all sorts of things. There are lots of choices now for speed.
And so Python doesn't have to be slow. You just have to sort of figure out what you're trying to
achieve and find the best tool for that.
So one other thing I do want to shout out,
I'm teaching a tutorial in a month over at the Anaconda sort of live,
live tutorial system, which will be how to use Numba.
So if, if, if something you saw here you want to go deep on,
there is there, there will be a tutorial.
I hopefully linked in the show notes or something.
Yeah, no, I can link that in the show notes. No problem. Absolutely.
So, so I'll be, I'll be going in.
Is that the high-performance Python with number thing?
Yes.
So yeah, we'll be doing worked examples,
and you'll get to ask questions and all that stuff.
Cool.
I'll make sure to put that in the show notes
so people can check it out.
Mm-hmm.
Cool.
All right.
Well, thanks for sharing all the projects that you guys are working on
and just the broader performance stuff that you're tracking.
Yeah, awesome.
Glad to chat.
You bet.
See you later.
Bye.